---
layout: post
title: Stupid Stuff I did Implementing an Atom Event Feed Service & Client
date: '2013-07-24T18:22:00.001+01:00'
author: Robert Elliot
tags: 
modified_time: '2013-07-24T18:24:18.298+01:00'
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-8805447266344101474.post-2150053529937798921
blogger_orig_url: http://blog.lidalia.org.uk/2013/07/stupid-stuff-i-did-implementing-atom.html
---

Some quick notes on the issues we've had implementing an [Atom Feed](http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4287) as a means of exposing events to clients over HTTP as suggested by [REST in Practice](http://restinpractice.com/book/). You can read up on the full details [in the book here](http://answers.oreilly.com/topic/2153-rest-in-practice-how-to-use-atom-for-event-driven-systems/).
#### Decisions I'm happy with:
<ol><li>We implemented the feeds using [ISO 8601](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_8601) formatted query params: http://hostname/eventfeed/period?from=2013-07-24T09:30Z&amp;to=2013-07-24T09:40Z. This worked well, as it meant we could as humans quickly find specific events we were interested in - in dev environments we have far fewer events, so we can simply ask for all those in a day rather than searching for a ten minute period that has one.</li><li>We made the "from" inclusive and the "to" exclusive, to ensure that an entry only ever appears in one feed, and also ensure that if we set the Last-Modified header to the latest entry in the working feed and the to date on an archive feed the Last-Modified header on a feed when it is archived is guaranteed to be later than the Last-Modified header on the feed when it was the working feed, even if the last event occurred a millisecond before the feed was archived.</li><li>The persistent atom feed client we've built has proven very stable - all of the bugs have been on the server side (mostly around cache headers), proving that so long as the atom and http specs are followed rigorously on the server side writing a client is trivial.</li><li>We've used the client in a replayable way - processing an entry simply updates our local cache of the entity to the _current state_ of the entity by following a link. Whilst events should not arrive out of order or ever be replayed, it doesn't (functionally!) matter if they are.</li></ol>
#### Mistakes I made:
<ol><li><b>Calculating whether a feed is a working feed or not multiple times when responding to the same request.</b>
This one is embarrassing, as it's a real schoolboy error, but I made it so may as well 'fess up. The same URI will at first point to a working feed and later point to an archive feed based on whether its period includes the current time or is entirely in the past. The working feed and the archive feed differ in their cache characteristics (the archived feed does not change, and so can be cached for a very long time) and also in whether or not they have a "next" link - an archive feed will, a working feed will not. Calculating whether or not a request was for a working feed twice in the same request can result in building the entity as a working feed, but setting the cache headers for an archive feed - which is disastrous, as it may lack events and will lack a next link.
</li><li><b>Using the same Etag &amp; Last-Modified values for working and archived feeds</b>
We went for the Etag of a feed being the entry ID of the latest entry in the feed, but this created an issue - the Etag for the working feed must be different to the Etag for an archived feed, otherwise a conditional (If-None-Match) request for a feed that _was_ the working feed but has since become an archive feed will get a 304 Not Modified response, with an eternal cache header since archived feeds should never change. Since the working feed will not have a "next" link, this means that the feed client gets stuck with a cached archive feed with no "next" link, so as it walks forward through the feed it always stops on that archive under the impression that there is no later feed whose events it can consume.

Solving this was relatively trivial - we just appended "-archive" or "-working" to the Etag depending on which the feed was.

In the same way the Last-Modified header should be the "updated" date of the latest entry on a working feed, but should be the "to" date on an archived feed to ensure that when a feed moves from being a working feed to being an archived feed a conditional If-Modified-Since request from the client will not result in the server returning a 304 Not Modified response to the client.</li><li><b>Caching the latest feed independent of the working feed.</b>
The client starts at the latest feed, which is a static URI which we allow to be cached for 1 second. It works backwards following the previous links in the feeds until it finds the feed containing the latest entry it has processed. It then works forward processing each entry and following the next links in the feed to find the next feed. This ultimately leaves it at the working feed (not the latest feed - the feed prior to the working feed has been archived, so in order for it to be cached eternally it must link to the working feed so the link is still correct when the working feed is itself archived). The working feed is also cached for 1 second.

The danger here is that because the latest and working feeds are cached separately, they may have different values in the cache - on run one, the latest feed is cached without event x, but by the time the working feed is requested it contains event x. This is then stored as the latest handled event. On run two, the cached latest feed may be returned - which does not contain event x, so the client follows the previous link chain to the earliest archived feed and in the process replays all of the events that it has already handled.

Due to our decision to make the events replayable this is not functionally catastrophic, but obviously it creates performance and latency issues.

There are three solutions we have thought of to this:
<ol><li>Stop allowing the responses on the latest and working feeds to be cached at all. This is undesirable, as it removes the scalability characteristics we get from using even very limited (max-age=1) generic HTTP caching.</li><li>Add a [Content-Location](http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2616#section-14.14) header to the latest feed, pointing at the working feed, and to the working feed, pointing at the latest feed. As I understand it this is simply a hint to any cache that they are the same thing at the moment the response is received (crucially not thereafter), and therefore that the cache may update its representations under other URIs appropriately. A quick test suggested this worked with the Apache HTTP Client cache implementation, but the HTTP 1.1 spec itself does not go so far as to promise all caches will honour it, and it seems a relatively little talked about part of the spec. I'm not entirely sure that my reading of the spec is correct, and clearly there is a lot of potential room for bugs in caches which would affect us in a case such as this where the relationship between the URI of the latest feed and the URI of the working feed is only ever a temporary one.</li><li>Switch the latest response from a 200 containing the feed to a 307 or 302 redirect to the working feed. This response can in turn be cached using an Expires header for the remainder of the working feed period. This seems relatively simple, so we're going to trial this approach.</li></ol></li><li><b>Using ROME/JDom with Xerces, and XML as the entries' content's type</b>
We used ROME for both creating and consuming our ATOM feed, but if the content type of the content element of your entry is XML then ROME runs up a new SAXBuilder in JDom, to parse it and prove it is valid. This in turn does a lot of reflection based looking up of factories, and because we're using Apache TomEE it ends up with Xerces 2.9. This process happens for every single entry in every single feed, and for us proved catastrophically expensive - with just two clients loading up feeds concurrently we ended up with the service essentially becoming unavailable.</li></ol>
#### Things that worry me:
At present we are storing the events in an Oracle database using a column defined as TIMESTAMP(3) WITH TIME ZONE DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP. I'm a little concerned that if the time on the database server were ever set backwards (perhaps due to an NTP correction) it is possible a new event would be inserted _prior_ to events that clients had already consumed, and so those clients would never see it. It's possible that we could do the insert rather more intelligently - something along the lines of CURRENT_TIMESTAMP or latest event + 1 millisecond, whichever is the later, to ensure that a new event always happens after the latest event; though I need to play with some SQL to have a clear idea of whether this is possible.

Another option might be to attempt to maintain a sequence and return events sequentially rather than by time; however, this then presents us with the issue of ensuring the sequence is guaranteed to be sequential, which might not be the case with Oracle RAC and would be very hard should we have to distribute the database in a more fundamental way. I would be interested to hear of other people's solutions to this issue.
#### Still To Do:
I'd really like to open source both the client and server code for this, as the whole point is that it's a generic mechanism that can be used domain independently. The server side code, tied as it is to containers such as Spring and the Servlet API, is perhaps less widely useful; but the client side code is a pure library.

I'd also like to explore [atom-archive-traverser](https://github.com/plasma147/atom-archive-traverser), which I've just found and looks very similar to our client though built on different libraries.

